Add how-to guides about primitives (#9716)
Qiskit/qiskit-terra: docs/how_to/use_estimator.rst

###########################

> Use the Estimator primitive

Reviewer: The first sentence says about observable. I wonder if the title could be more `Compute expectation value with an Estimator`. I had often been asked how to easily compute an expectation value with qiskit (with opflow it was more work). Having this title leads more towards what they want to do and this shows how. The title otherwise does not offer much - you would already need to know you wanted to use an Estimator unless you were curious what it was for.

Similar comment for Sampler.

Reviewer: Yes, for me those work much better as titles.

###########################

This guide shows how to get the expected value of an observable for a given quantum circuit with the :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` primitive.

.. note::

    While this guide only uses Qiskit Terra's implementation of the ``Estimator`` primitive, there are other
    implementations of this primitive like Qiskit Terra's :class:`~qiskit.primitives.BackendEstimator`, Qiskit Aer's :class:`~qiskit_aer.primitives.Estimator`

>     and Qiskit Runtime's :class:`~qiskit_ibm_runtime.Estimator`.

Reviewer: There is also this tutorial being done around selection Qiskit/qiskit-tutorials#1385 since you mention others here. That maybe helpful to link eventually to perhaps give clarity to the fact that there other others and how to select. Now the runtime has a bunch of tutorials for the runtime primitives too - would that be a "better" link than the API ref (Or in addition?)

Initialize observable
=====================

The first step is to define the observable whose expected value you want to compute. This observable can be any ``BaseOperator``, like the operators from :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info`.
Among them it is preferable to use :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`.

.. testcode::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

>     obs = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XX", "YY", "ZZ"], [1, 1, -1, 1])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    obs = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XX", "YY", "ZZ"], coeffs=[1, 1, -1, 1])
```
Perhaps we can be a bit more verbose and name at least this 2nd parameter here so its easier to read/understand/know what it does.

Initialize quantum circuits
===========================

Then you need to create the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` for which you want to obtain the expected value.

.. plot::
    :include-source:

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)
    qc.draw("mpl")

.. testsetup::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)

Initialize the ``Estimator``
============================

Then, you need to create an :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` object.

.. testcode::

    from qiskit.primitives import Estimator

>     estimator = Estimator()

Reviewer: By default this gives an ideal result (akin to using statevector) - should we mention this?

Author: I'm not sure this is the place for that. This is supposed to be only a step-by-step guide for working with an `Estimator` instead of an explanation about the differences between implementations or going into all the details of the class (this is what API reference is for).  I guess it depends on how important/useful we consider to tell people how to configure the `shots` in `options` here.

Moreover, we plan to write an explanation about the primitives soon. It might be better to cover that there. A tutorial is also a fine place to mention that.

Reviewer: For me since this all around an Estimator configuring it (since it can work differently) to do the job you need seems highly relevant. I would not expect any of that for the QuantumCircuit or Operator it uses but since howto for using the Estimator not saying anything I am just not sure. Though I would not say much that's for certain - which is why I said mention not explain. Part of my rationale for mentioning is that I have had to answer issues where 'its my code doesn't give the same result/fails' when going from an qiskit primitives Estimator() to an Aer Estimator() both just constructed as defaults. Knowing what it does/how its configured is key there. Since there is a note pointing to the other estimators what is the implication - they are the same and can be swapped in. I have had to give people explanation on more than one occasion. I don't think this howto should deal with that of course, but maybe it should state at least how the Estimator will behave in the config its used in.

Author: If it's a common user pain point I guess it might be better to mention that explicitly. 

Now I'm also thinking about adding an example in which I change from the default `Statevector`-based primitives to shot-based so a user can see quickly how to set the `options` argument in the primitives, as it's not obvious if you just look at the API reference.

Reviewer: There are two ways there if you did not figure. It can be set when calling run()  - via kwargs (named run_options in code if you end up looking) - so you can change it on a call by call basis. The value used on run() can be also be set via the constructor - options - for all run invocations (overridden by the one if passed to run). This latter via options is more normal if a user wants to use an Estimator with an algorithm like VQE where you want as a user to config the shots used in circuit execution later when used by VQE. Since the howto is more about using an Estimator and calling run yourself maybe the shots on run() is more suitable to an example here. You can see examples of both in the unit tests here https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/blob/fa7ac688fdce3ecc27fb7e13d8b2c3f8553b3ff8/test/python/primitives/test_estimator.py#L612-L633

===================

Now that you have defined ``estimator``, you can create a :class:`~.PrimitiveJob` (subclass of :class:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1`) with the
:meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method and, then, you can get the results (as a :class:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult` object) with
the results with the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1.result` method.

.. testcode::

    job = estimator.run(qc, obs)
    result = job.result()
    print(result)

.. testoutput::

    EstimatorResult(values=array([4.]), metadata=[{}])

Get the expected value
----------------------

From these results you can take the expected values with the attribute :attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values`.

Generally, :attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values` returns a `numpy.ndarray <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.ndarray.html>`_
whose ``i``-th element would be the expectation value corresponding to the ``i``-th circuit and ``i``-th observable.

.. testcode::

    exp_value = result.values[0]
    print(exp_value)

.. testoutput::

    3.999999999999999

Parameterized circuits with ``Estimator``
=========================================

> The :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` primitive also has the option to include unbound parameterized circuits like the one below.

Reviewer: Here this starts to get close to using an optimizer with a parameterized circuit to find minimum exp val. i.e VQE. Would we want a howto to show using an estimator for that. Of course we have a more comprehensive pre-built VQE algo - but its a nice simple howto to build a simple one. Here the parameters are applied sequentially - rather than all at once in this example.

Reviewer: I guess I see people using the Estimator with an optimizer to make a simple VQE. It just seemed more like an aspect someone might be wanting to do and a howto, that includes parameterized circuits, which seemed to be the aspect the latter section was bringing in, might be a task that had more relevancy. I agree its bit more complex than what is there and maybe is more applicable for a future howto. It was less about VQE and more that this a common way to use parameterized ccts with an Estimator.

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)

.. note::

    The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` you pass to :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` must not include any measurements.

Initialize the ``Estimator``
============================

Then, you need to create an :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` object.

.. testcode::

    from qiskit.primitives import Estimator

    estimator = Estimator()

Run and get results
===================

Now that you have defined ``estimator``, you can create a :class:`~.PrimitiveJob` (subclass of :class:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1`) with the
:meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method and, then, you can get the results (as a :class:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult` object) with
the results with the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1.result` method.

.. testcode::

    job = estimator.run(qc, observable)
    result = job.result()
    print(result)

.. testoutput::

    EstimatorResult(values=array([4.]), metadata=[{}])

Get the expected value
----------------------

From these results you can take the expected values with the attribute :attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values`.

> Generally, :attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values` returns a `numpy.ndarray <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.ndarray.html>`_

Reviewer 2: Change to use numpy intersphinx

whose ``i``-th element would be the expectation value corresponding to the ``i``-th circuit and ``i``-th observable.

.. testcode::

    exp_value = result.values[0]
    print(exp_value)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

###############################################
Compute an expectation value with ``Estimator``
###############################################

This guide shows how to get the expected value of an observable for a given quantum circuit with the :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` primitive.

.. note::

    While this guide only uses Qiskit Terra's implementation of the ``Estimator`` primitive, there are other
    implementations of this primitive like Qiskit Terra's :class:`~qiskit.primitives.BackendEstimator`, Qiskit Aer's :class:`~qiskit_aer.primitives.Estimator`
    and Qiskit Runtime's :class:`~qiskit_ibm_runtime.Estimator`.

Initialize observable
=====================

> The first step is to define the observable whose expected value you want to compute. This observable can be any ``BaseOperator``, like the operators from :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info`.

Author: There's actually no documentation for `qiskit.quantum_info.operators.base_operator.BaseOperator` 😅 (at least that I could find)

I already tried writing ```:class:`~.BaseOperator` ```, ```:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.operators.base_operator.BaseOperator` ``` and even ```:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.BaseOperator` ``` but none of them generated any link.

Moreover if you check, for example, [the page of the Clifford operator](https://qiskit.org/documentation/stubs/qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford.html) you'll see that `BaseOperator` appears in "Bases" but there's no link either.

> The first step is to define the observable whose expected value you want to compute. This observable can be any ``BaseOperator``, like the operators from :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info`.

Author: However, even though there would be no actual link if I wrote ```:class:`~.BaseOperator` ``` or  ```:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.operators.base_operator.BaseOperator` ``` the output in the guide would look the same as if I wrote ``` ``BaseOperator`` ```. 

Would it be better if I wrote the Sphinx link in case we eventually decide to document that class?

Then you need to create the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` for which you want to obtain the expected value.

.. plot::
    :include-source:

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)
    qc.draw("mpl")

.. testsetup::

    # This code is repeated (but hidden) because we will need to use the variables with the extension sphinx.ext.doctest (testsetup/testcode/testoutput directives)
    # and we can't reuse the variables from the plot directive above because they are incompatible.
    # The plot directive is used to draw the circuit with matplotlib and the code is shown because of the include-source flag.
    
    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)

.. note::

    The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` you pass to :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` must not include any measurements.

Initialize the ``Estimator``
============================

Then, you need to create an :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` object.

.. testcode::

    from qiskit.primitives import Estimator

    estimator = Estimator()

Run and get results
===================

> Now that you have defined ``estimator``, you can create a :class:`~.PrimitiveJob` (subclass of :class:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1`) with the
> :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method and, then, you can get the results (as a :class:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult` object) with
> the results with the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1.result` method.

Reviewer 3: Similar comment as before, in my opinion you are not "creating" a job, you are calling `run` and getting a job as a result:

```suggestion
Now that you have defined your ``estimator``, you can run your estimation by calling the :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method, 
which returns an instance of :class:`~.PrimitiveJob` (subclass of :class:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1`). You can get the results from the job (as a :class:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult` object) 
with the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1.result` method.
```

.. testcode::

    job = estimator.run(qc, observable)
    result = job.result()
    print(result)

.. testoutput::

    EstimatorResult(values=array([4.]), metadata=[{}])

Get the expected value
----------------------

> From these results you can take the expected values with the attribute :attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From these results you can extract the expected values with the attribute :attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values`.
```

> Generally, :attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values` returns a :class:`numpy.ndarray`

Reviewer 3: It is not generally, right? It is always. 

```suggestion
:attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values` contains a :class:`numpy.ndarray`
```

> whose ``i``-th element would be the expectation value corresponding to the ``i``-th circuit and ``i``-th observable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
whose ``i``-th element is the expectation value corresponding to the ``i``-th circuit and ``i``-th observable.
```

.. testcode::

    exp_value = result.values[0]
    print(exp_value)

.. testoutput::

    3.999999999999999

Parameterized circuits with ``Estimator``
=========================================

> The :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` primitive also has the option to include unbound parameterized circuits like the one below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` primitive can be run with unbound parameterized circuits like the one below.
```

You can also bind values to the parameters of the circuit and follow the steps
of the previous example.

.. testcode::

    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

    theta = Parameter('θ')
    param_qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    param_qc.ry(theta, 0)
    param_qc.cx(0,1)
    print(param_qc.draw())

.. testoutput::

         ┌───────┐     
    q_0: ┤ Ry(θ) ├──■──
         └───────┘┌─┴─┐
    q_1: ─────────┤ X ├
                  └───┘

The main difference from the previous case is that now you need to include the parameter values
for which you want to evaluate the expectation value as a ``list`` of ``list``\ s of ``float``\ s.

> The idea is that the ``i``-th element of the bigger ``list`` is the set of parameter values

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The idea is that the ``i``-th element of the outer``list`` is the set of parameter values
```

that corresponds to the ``i``-th circuit and observable.

.. testcode::

    import numpy as np
    
    parameter_values = [[0], [np.pi/6], [np.pi/2]]

    job = estimator.run([param_qc]*3, [observable]*3, parameter_values=parameter_values)
    values = job.result().values

    for i in range(3):
        print(f"Parameter: {parameter_values[i][0]:.5f}\t Expectation value: {values[i]}")

.. testoutput::

    Parameter: 0.00000	 Expectation value: 2.0
    Parameter: 0.52360	 Expectation value: 3.0
    Parameter: 1.57080	 Expectation value: 4.0

Change run options
==================

It is also possible that you may want to change any other option.

> For example, in the previous sections the :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator`
> is :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector`-based but it can be changed
> to shot-based by setting a number of ``shots``. For reproducibility purposes, in this
> guide a ``seed`` will also be set.

Reviewer 3: I think that this description is a bit more accurate, all that setting shots does is adding artificial shot noise to the Statevector-based simulation:

```suggestion
By default, the reference :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` class performs an exact statevector
calculation based on the :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` class. However, this can be 
modified to include shot noise if the number of ``shots`` is set. 
For reproducibility purposes, a ``seed`` will also be set in the following examples.
```

There are two main ways of doing this:

> * Setting keyword arguments in the :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method.

Reviewer 3: For consistency with the format of the other option:

```suggestion
* Set keyword arguments in the :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method.
```

> ###############################################
> Compute an expectation value with ``Estimator``
> ###############################################

Reviewer 4: I think the inclusion of the word "primitive" would make it easier to find.

```suggestion
#########################################################
Compute an expectation value with ``Estimator`` primitive
#########################################################
```

This guide shows how to get the expected value of an observable for a given quantum circuit with the :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` primitive.

.. note::

    While this guide uses Qiskit’s reference implementation, the ``Estimator`` primitive can be run with any provider using :class:`~qiskit.primitives.BackendEstimator` .
    
    .. code-block::

        from qiskit.primitives import BackendEstimator

>         from qiskit_provider import QiskitProvider

Reviewer 4: Maybe a way to signal that we are not referring to a literal module called like that?
```suggestion
        from <some_qiskit_provider> import QiskitProvider
```

        provider = QiskitProvider()
        backend = provider.get_backend('backend_name')
        estimator = BackendEstimator(backend)

    There are some providers that implement primitives natively (see `this page <http://qiskit.org/providers/#primitives>`_ for more details).

Initialize observable
=====================

The first step is to define the observable whose expected value you want to compute. This observable can be any ``BaseOperator``, like the operators from :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info`.
Among them it is preferable to use :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`.

.. testcode::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

    observable = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XX", "YY", "ZZ"], coeffs=[1, 1, -1, 1])

> Initialize quantum circuits

Reviewer 4: Is the "circuits" plural intentional

Author: Yes. You can actually define several circuits for one run of both `Sampler` and `Estimator`. In the case of `Estimator`  you can also pass a list of observables. 

I see that I left the "Initialize observable" title in singular though. 😅

Reviewer 4: and the example is with a single circuit.

Reviewer 4: Solved by 51a1260fea0cfa9b437af39918555af85fc520d8

.. testcode::

    from qiskit.primitives import Estimator

    estimator = Estimator()

Run and get results
===================

Now that you have defined your ``estimator``, you can run your estimation by calling the :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method, 
which returns an instance of :class:`~.PrimitiveJob` (subclass of :class:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1`). You can get the results from the job (as a :class:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult` object) 
with the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1.result` method.

.. testcode::

    job = estimator.run(qc, observable)
    result = job.result()
    print(result)

.. testoutput::

    EstimatorResult(values=array([4.]), metadata=[{}])

Get the expected value
----------------------

From these results you can extract the expected values with the attribute :attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values`.

:attr:`~qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values` returns a :class:`numpy.ndarray`
whose ``i``-th element is the expectation value corresponding to the ``i``-th circuit and ``i``-th observable.

.. testcode::

    exp_value = result.values[0]
    print(exp_value)

.. testoutput::

    3.999999999999999

> Parameterized circuits with ``Estimator``

Reviewer 4: Should be this the same or a different how-to?

Following https://qiskit.github.io/qiskit_sphinx_theme/tutorials/tutorials_guidelines.html#provide-concrete-steps:

> ignore options and alternatives.

Author: This is a how-to not a tutorial. Options in how-tos are fine

    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

    theta = Parameter('θ')
    param_qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    param_qc.ry(theta, 0)
    param_qc.cx(0,1)
    print(param_qc.draw())

.. testoutput::

         ┌───────┐     
    q_0: ┤ Ry(θ) ├──■──
         └───────┘┌─┴─┐
    q_1: ─────────┤ X ├
                  └───┘

The main difference with the previous case is that now you need to specify the sets of parameter values
for which you want to evaluate the expectation value as a ``list`` of ``list``\ s of ``float``\ s.
The idea is that the ``i``-th element of the outer``list`` is the set of parameter values
that corresponds to the ``i``-th circuit and observable.

.. testcode::

    import numpy as np
    
    parameter_values = [[0], [np.pi/6], [np.pi/2]]

    job = estimator.run([param_qc]*3, [observable]*3, parameter_values=parameter_values)
    values = job.result().values

    for i in range(3):
        print(f"Parameter: {parameter_values[i][0]:.5f}\t Expectation value: {values[i]}")

.. testoutput::

    Parameter: 0.00000	 Expectation value: 2.0
    Parameter: 0.52360	 Expectation value: 3.0
    Parameter: 1.57080	 Expectation value: 4.0

Change run options
==================

> Your workflow might require tuning primitive run options, such as shots.

Reviewer 4: ditto https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/9716/files#r1189714135

Author: Fixed in [004f4ad](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/9716/commits/004f4ad2b73be085c45db4761d57cb18dc74f7eb)

calculation based on the :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` class. However, this can be 
modified to include shot noise if the number of ``shots`` is set. 
For reproducibility purposes, a ``seed`` will also be set in the following examples.

There are two main ways of setting options in the :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator`:

* Set keyword arguments in the :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method.
* Modify :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` options.

Set keyword arguments for :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run`
------------------------------------------------------------------

If you only want to change the settings for a specific run, it can be more convenient to
set the options inside the :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run` method. You can do this by
passing them as keyword arguments.

.. testcode::

    job = estimator.run(qc, observable, shots=2048, seed=123)
    result = job.result()
    print(result)

.. testoutput::

    EstimatorResult(values=array([4.]), metadata=[{'variance': 3.552713678800501e-15, 'shots': 2048}])

.. testcode::

    print(result.values[0])

.. testoutput::

    3.999999998697238

> Change :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` options

Reviewer 4: The bullet in https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/9716/files#diff-592e455293d2eb77839a55cab187e1924e1cd6f2bf5f249c5110eaa13b5d7e84R172 says "modify". Maybe better to keep that?

```suggestion
Modify :class:`~qiskit.primitives.Estimator` options
```

    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)

.. note::

>     The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` can't include any measurements.

Reviewer: Taken at face value this is an incorrect statement. A QuantumCircuit can include measurements. If however you are going to pass it to an Estimator, the case here, then it must not include any measurement instructions.

Author: You're right. How about this?

> The ``QuantumCircuit`` you pass to ``Estimator`` must not include any measurement
> The ``QuantumCircuit`` you pass to ``Sampler`` must include measurements

Author: Updated in c889e90.
